# Read me

#### The evolution of ontogenetic _decision-making_ in the wood of a clade of tropical plants. 

## Description

This repository contains the data and code used to produce the results and figures of the paper, "The evolution of ontogenetic _decision-making_ in the wood of a clade of tropical plants", by Emilio Petrone-Mendoza, Mariana Benítez, María Elena Lárraga and Mark E. Olson (UNAM, Mexico).

The repository is is divided in: 

1. `Data`: Data derived from the wood cell lineage history of *Pedilanthus* clade species of the genus *Euphorbia*. 
   - `Raw_data/`
   - `Cell_files_data/` 
   - `euclidean_distance_all/`
   - `euclidean_distance_morethanone/`
   - `words_count_all/`
   - `words_count_morethanone/`
2. `Figures`: figures of the manuscript generated by scripts and data 
3. `meta`: additional tables and information from the samples.
4. `scripts`: Executables for the analysis of cell lineage data. Some scripts are written in python and other in R.

In the following, a sequential explanation of the files in `Data` and results generated by scripts in the `scripts` will be explained. Whhhhaaaattt???

Within the `Data/Raw_data/`, there is one file for each sample starting with the nameor number of each one. For example, we coded three wood samples from *Euphorbia calcarata*, so there are three files: 

* `Data`:
  - `Raw_data/`:
    - `892_edited.txt`
    - `896_edited.txt`
    - `939_edited.txt`

The `sample_edited.txt` files are tab delimited files containing three columns: the first one specifying the species of the sample, the second has the cell lineage number, and the third one has the sequence of coded cells.  

| Species       | Cell file number | Cell lineage sequence |
| -------------- | :----:    | :----:   |
| *E. calcarata* |    C1     |  FFFFVPFFFPF... |
| *E. calcarata* |    C2     |  FFFFFFPFPFP... |

In addition to the cell-to-letter code from derived wood cells, some cell lineage sequences contain three additional metadata with the following syntax and biological meaning: 

* Wood cells delimited by parenthesis and a ^ character. 
* A Converge- word delimited by parenthesis.
* Hyphens (-) at the beginning of some cell lineages. 

Within the cell lineage sequence there are some additional parameters.

### Data preprocessing
3. Al archivo edited.txt con un awk comand se le quita los identificadores y se redirige a un nuevo archivo que deja solamente las filas. Despúes de eso con sed comands se eliminan los (Converge-) y manualmente se editan las dudas y células no codificadas correctamente (por ejemplo, células que se codifican con ^para ejemplificar células que se meten en el plano de otra célula se eliminan).

File editing was performed using this commands: 
    awk '{print $4'} Data/Raw_data/P_bracteatus/845_edited.txt > Data/Raw_data/P_bracteatus/845_edited_cells.txt 
    awk '{print $2,$3}' Data/Raw_data/P_macrocarpus/EPM13_edited.txt > Data/Raw_data/P_macrocarpus/EPM13_edited.txt 
    sed -i 's/(Converge)//g' Data/Raw_data/P_macrocarpus/EPM13_edited_cells.txt 
 
4. El archivo después de ser editado se copia a la carpeta Data/Cell_files_data. De esa forma ya se pueden contabilizar las transiciones usando los scripts. Un ejemplo de como se copian los archivos a la carpeta:
    cp Data/Raw_data/P_cymbiferus/EPM15_edited_cells.txt Data/Cell_files_data/EPM15_edited_cells.txt

#### To add cells as a new cell file after codifying a convergence event add:
sed -Ei 's/\(Converge-\)/&\n/g' 845_edited_cells_NotConverge.txt
Files with convergence events coded as separate cell lineages were saved in Data/Cell_files_data/ConvergeAssOtherLineage

### Cell lineage sequence analysis
Global functions were created in wordanalysis.py python script. The script has functions to count number of cells (letters), length of lineages, word counting, estimating euclidean distance, and Lempel-Ziv and Shannon-Entropy estimation methods.
The l-system.py script generates the different virtual wood cell lineages. (It is run previosly to the other analysis)

To determine the length of cell lineages and cell type frequencies: 

1. count_longitudes.py generates a file named cell_lengths.csv having the lengths of the cell lineages placed in Data/
2. count_transitions.py counts number of cell types and number of words (words from length 2 to 31) and number of words appearing more than ones. Output of the word counts are named as wordcounts*n*.csv and are placed on the Data/word_counts_all folder. The *n* denotes the length of the word. Words counts appearing more than one are placed on the word_counts_morethanone folder.The count_transitionswithR.py makes the same as count_transitions.py but it includes the ray system. 
3. The homogeneity_index.py script generates evaluates the homogeneity indexes for the cell lineages and creates a data frame with the value measure for each cell lineage across samples. 

### Clean Data

* Field experiment root trait data output ('BRTdata.csv')

* Field experiment fitness data ('FitnessData.csv')

* Rhizotron root architecture data ('Rhiz_root_traits.csv')


## Worwflow. 

In the script files, the [wordanalysis.py] script contains several functions used in other scripts such as [count_transitions.py]

#The order of analysis can proceed in the following order:

	1) count_longitudes.py
	2) count_transitions.py
	3) count_transitionswithR.py
	4) homogenity_index.py
	5) wordcomparisonmethods.py####
	6) wordcomplexity.py
	7) wordcomplexity_withR.py
	

### R script

* Calculating root architecture traits ('RootArchitecture_Calc.R')

* Field competition experiment datananalysis ('Field_SelAnalysis_LinearMixedModels')

* Rhizotron greenhouse study analysis ('Rhizotron_2017_LinearMixedModel_Figures.R')

* Useful R script sourced in the main analysis above to compute summary statistics ('SummarySE.R')


# Key:

# Rhizotron experiment

Id* = plant identification number
Experiment* = temporal block 
Population* = plant population of origin
Code* = code of plant maternal line and population combined
Species* = Species code, Ip = I. purpurea and Ihed = Ihederacea
ML* = Maternal line
PrimaryRootLength* = calculated primary root length
Angle_* = Angle root measurement for the left '_1' and the right '_2' root angles
AvAng* = Average root angle
Total.Area* = Total root system area


# Field experiment

MaxWidth* = Root system width
AreaConvexHull* = Root size
AvAng* = Average root angle
Of_exp* = Cohort; O*= cohort 1, R*= cohort 2
ML* = Maternal line
Combos* = species by maternal line by species maternal line competition pairing
Important note: maternal lines are explicitly nested within population--they only occur within specific populations and species.


